Rules and groups (#211)
hiero-ledger/governance: roles-and-groups.md

# Roles and Groups

This file contains an overview of our rules for roles and groups

## Definition of general roles

The Hiero project (and the LFDT) defines 3 different types of **roles**: **Contributors**, **Committers**, and **Maintainers**.
Each person who contributes to Hiero must follow our [**Code of Conduct**](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/.github/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).
Those roles are not assigned globally for the Hiero project but per **project**.
In most cases a project is a single GitHub repository, but it can also be a group of repositories that are related to each other.
A person can have multiple roles in multiple projects.

### Contributors

Any person that does any contribution to the project is a Contributor. A contribution can be anything from opening an issue, to writing code, to writing documentation, etc.

>   - If a PR has gone 2 days without approvals or an Issue or Discussion has no activity for 2 days, the owner must reach our to our hiero-general Discord channel.

Reviewer: can we add a link to the discord channel here

Reviewer 2: link added to the server

  - If a PR or discussion has gone stale for 2 weeks, the repo maintainers can close them due to inactivity.
We honor legitimate contributions to the project, and we want to make sure that all contributions are recognized.
A Contributor can be nominated by a Committer or a Maintainer to become a Committer:
  - **Start Contributing**: Submit pull requests, report bugs, improve docs, review code. Show consistency and quality in your contributions
  - **Build Trust and Tack Record**: Active committers will notice your contributions, your understanding and responsiveness.
  - **Get noticed**: Consistency and valuable contributions will create more project involvement and reliability.

>   - **Review elegibility**: A minimum approved PRs and a reasonable time contributing to the project (3-6 months) is the general acceptable basline for eleibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - **Review eligibility**: A minimum number of approved PRs and a reasonable time contributing to the project (3-6 months) is the general acceptable baseline for eligibility. 
```

the general structure of the project (fits our best practices, is secure, ...), and so on.

In addition, the Maintainers should report project updates to the Hiero **Technical Steering Committee** (TSC).
A Committer of a project can be nominated to become a Maintainer:

- **Define your project's needs**: A repository should have 1 to 3 maintainers to ensure a project's sustainability and resilience. It is not necesarily a goal for the committer to become a mintainer unless the project's needs require it to have more maintainers.
- **Nominate a maintainer**: To promote a candidate, a vote should be held in a GitHub PR (by doing a change to the config.yaml file) and by making mention of the basis reached for nominating the Maintainer.
- **Approve the nomination**: All Maintainers should vote on that nomination and the vote passes when reaching majority of votes.
- **Make adjustments**: A maintainer is considered inactive if there has been no activity for six months and there has been no response when trying to contact them.

A maintainer can lose the role if:

- Breaks code of conduct

> - Shown no activity for 6 months and does not responds when reached

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Are inactive for 6 months and do not responds when reached
```

# Roles and Groups

This file contains an overview of our rules for roles and groups

## [Definition of general roles](#roles)

The Hiero project (and the LFDT) defines 3 different types of **roles**: **Contributors**, **Committers**, and **Maintainers**.
Each person who contributes to Hiero must follow our [**Code of Conduct**](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/.github/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).
Those roles are not assigned globally for the Hiero project but per **project**.
In most cases a project is a single GitHub repository, but it can also be a group of repositories that are related to each other.
A person can have multiple roles in multiple projects.

### [Contributors](#contributors)

Any person that does any contribution to the project is a Contributor. A contribution can be anything from opening an issue, to writing code, to writing documentation, etc.

>   - If a PR has gone 2 days without approvals or an Issue or Discussion has no activity for 2 days, the owner must reach our to our [hiero-general Discord channel](https://discord.lfdecentralizedtrust.org/).

Reviewer 3: Should we have a separate channel for discussion about Issues/Discussion? Not sure how active the `hiero-general` channel in Discord is but I'd hate for things to get lost in it.

Reviewer 2: you should have the power to create channels.

  - If a PR or discussion has gone stale for 2 weeks, the repo maintainers can close them due to inactivity.
We honor legitimate contributions to the project, and we want to make sure that all contributions are recognized.

A Contributor can be nominated by a Committer or a Maintainer to become a Committer:

>   - **Start Contributing**: Submit pull requests, report bugs, improve docs, review code. Show consistency and quality in your contributions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - **Start Contributing**: Submit pull requests, report bugs, improve docs, review code. Show consistency and quality in your contributions.
```

>   - **Build Trust and Tack Record**: Active committers will notice your contributions, your understanding and responsiveness.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - **Build Trust and Tack Record**: Active committers will notice your contributions, your understanding, and responsiveness.
```

  - **Get noticed**: Consistency and valuable contributions will create more project involvement and reliability.
  - **Review eligibility**: A minimum number of approved PRs and a reasonable time contributing to the project (3-6 months) is the general acceptable baseline for eligibility. 

### Committers

A Committer has specific rights for the project.

As an example a Committer can assign people to issues, merge PRs, or create branches directly in a repository of the project.
Any Committer or Maintainer of the given project should nominate a Contributor to become a Committer based on the project's needs and following these steps:

> - **Define your project's needs**: A repository should have minimum 3 committers to ensure a project's sustainability and resilience. It will also allow for fairness in the votes. Project owners, can choose to have more committers depending on the size of their project.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Define your project's needs**: A repository should have minimum 3 committers to ensure a project's sustainability and resilience. It will also allow for fairness in the votes. Project owners can choose to have more committers depending on the size of their project.
```

- **Verify your project's needs**: Committers or Maintainers should define the number of good contributions that a Contributor must reach to consider a nomination. This is based on the size and complexity of the repo in question.
- **Nominate more resources**: To promote a contributor, a vote should be held in a GitHub PR (by doing a change to the config.yaml file) and by making mention of the basis reached for nominating the Contributor.
- **Approve the nomination**: All Maintainers should vote on that nomination and the vote passes when reaching majority of votes.
- **Make adjustments**: Maintainers should be responsible for removing inactive committers. A committer is considered inactive if there has been no activity for six months and there has been no response when trying to contact them.
As long as a Committer follows our Code of Conduct, makes reasonable contributions to the project,
and is not violating any of our policies, they will keep their Committer role.

A committer can lose the role if:

> - Breaks code of conduct

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Breaks Code of Conduct
```

A Maintainer should drive the project's roadmap/vision and take care of topics like community meetings,
the general structure of the project (fits our best practices, is secure, ...), and so on.

In addition, the Maintainers should report project updates to the Hiero **Technical Steering Committee** (TSC).
A Committer of a project can be nominated to become a Maintainer:

- **Define your project's needs**: A repository should have 1 to 3 maintainers to ensure a project's sustainability and resilience. It is not necesarily a goal for the committer to become a mintainer unless the project's needs require it to have more maintainers.
- **Nominate a maintainer**: To promote a candidate, a vote should be held in a GitHub PR (by doing a change to the config.yaml file) and by making mention of the basis reached for nominating the Maintainer.
- **Approve the nomination**: All Maintainers should vote on that nomination and the vote passes when reaching majority of votes.
- **Make adjustments**: A maintainer is considered inactive if there has been no activity for six months and there has been no response when trying to contact them.

A maintainer can lose the role if:

> - Breaks code of conduct

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Breaks Code of Conduct
```

> - Are inactive for 6 months and do not responds when reached

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Are inactive for 6 months and does not respond when reached out to
```

- Keeps making bad decisions (their contributions are actively affecting the project's performance).

More on maintainer guidelines can be found on the [**LFDT TAC site**](https://lf-decentralized-trust.github.io/governance/governing-documents/MAINTAINERS-file.html).

## [Definition of groups](#groups)

> Since Hiero contains multiple projects, we need to define GitHub **groups** that are used to manage the access to the GitHub repositories.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since Hiero contains multiple projects, we define GitHub **groups** that are used to manage the access to the GitHub repositories.
```

The groups are defined in the `config.yaml` file and are used to manage the access to the GitHub repositories that belong to a project.
Contributors do not have any specific rights, and therefore we do not need to define any groups for them.
Committers and Maintainers are defined in groups that are used to manage the access to the GitHub repositories.
For each project we have defined a Committers group and a Maintainers group:

- **`PROJECT-maintainers`**: For each project we have a group that defines the Maintainers of that project.
- **`PROJECT-committers`**: For each project we have a group that defines the Committers of that project.

> Next to that you can find some other general groups in the [`config.yaml`](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/governance/blob/main/config.yaml) file:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are general groups in the [`config.yaml`](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/governance/blob/main/config.yaml) file as well:
```

> - **`hiero-automation`**: CI/CD Automation service account for hiero-ledger projects

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **`hiero-automation`**: This group contains the CI/CD Automation service account for hiero-ledger projects.
```

> - **`hiero-mirror-node-automation`**: CI/CD Automation serice account for hiero-ledger mirror node projects

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **`hiero-PROJECT-automation`**: This group contains the CI/CD Automation service account for hiero-ledger specific projects, if needed.
```

> - **`github-maintainers`**: The group is responsible for maintaining our GitHub environment and infrastructure (including GitHub Action runners, ...).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **`github-maintainers`**: This group contains who is responsible for maintaining our GitHub environment and infrastructure (including GitHub Action runners, ...).
```

> - **`tsc`**: The group that contains all members of the technical steering committee (TSC) as defined [here](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/tsc).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **`tsc`**: This group contains all members of the technical steering committee (TSC) as defined [here](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/tsc).
```

> - **`lf-staff`**: The group contains all Linux Foundation and LF Decentralized Trust members that needs (mostly ADMIN) rights on the org.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **`lf-staff`**: This group contains all Linux Foundation and LF Decentralized Trust members that needs (mostly ADMIN) rights on the org.
```

> - **`security-maintainers`**: This group contains members of the security teams who are responsible for monitoring and maintaining security within hiero-ledger projects

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **`security-maintainers`**: This group contains members of the security teams who are responsible for monitoring and maintaining security within hiero-ledger projects.
```

> - **`prod-security`**: This group contains members of the security teams who are responsible for monitoring and maintaining security within hiero-ledger projects

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **`prod-security`**: This group contains members of the security teams who are responsible for monitoring and maintaining security within hiero-ledger projects.
```

> - **`sec-ops`**: This group contains members of the security teams who are responsible for monitoring and maintaining security within hiero-ledger projects

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **`sec-ops`**: This group contains members of the security teams who are responsible for monitoring and maintaining security within hiero-ledger projects.
```

## [Definitions of rights](#rights)

For each project the following GitHub roles should be defined for the groups that work on the project.

> Those GitHub roles defines the rights of the groups on the GitHub repositories of the project.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The GitHub roles define the rights of the groups on the GitHub repositories of the project.
```

### [Voting](#voting)

When it comes to electing and voting for new committers or new maintainers, the project should consider the following:

For candidates working on getting promoted to Committers or Maintainers:
- The candidate needs to show participation in the project by contributing with code, issues, discussions, reviews, etc.
- These contributions need to show proper understanding of the project and quality of the work.
- 3 to 6 months worth of contributions is considered a good minimum for candidates to be selected for a role promotion.
- A Committer or Maintainer will be considered inactive if they shown no activity for 6 months at least, in such case, they could be selected for removal.
- A Committer can maintain their privileges independently from their job changes.

For Maintainers and Committers voting on new candidates:
- When a candidate is selected for becoming a Committer or a Maintainer, this proposal needs to be made via PR request against the config.yaml in the governance repo.
- An example of a promotion can be found in the following [PR](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/governance/pull/208).

> - Once the PR is created, all the maintainers of the repo in question need to be added as reviewers and their vote should be provided.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Once the PR is created, all the maintainers of the repo in question need to be added as reviewers and their vote should be provided.
- The creator of the PR should notify all maintainers that a vote is now open.
```

> - Maintainers can vote in favor of the candidate's promotion by approving the PR, or posting a comment in the PR in case they do not approve the promotion or they do not want to cast a vote in favor or against along with their explanation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Maintainers can vote in favor of the candidate's promotion by approving the PR with a comment indicating approval.
- Maintainers can vote against the candidate's promotion by posting a comment in the PR along with their explanation.
- Maintainers can abstain from voting by posting a comment in the PR along with their explanation.
- The comment associated with a maintainers vote should be formatted as `[APPROVE|REJECT|ABSTAIN] - <explanation>`.

```

- Once the PR has gathered the majority of the votes, the PR can be merged and the candidate will be officially part of their new Committer or Maintainer teams.

> - If a PR remains inactive for 2 days, it is a responsability of the PR owner to reach out to the reviewers via Discord, bring it up in Community calls or reach out for help in the hiero-general Discord channel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If a PR remains inactive for 2 days, it is a responsibility of the PR owner to reach out to the reviewers via Discord, bring it up in Community calls or reach out for help in the [hiero-general Discord channel](https://discord.com/channels/905194001349627914/1289954446712770600).
```

- If a PR shows no activity for 2 weeks, it will be considered stale and it will be closed with no promotion.
- A Maintainer or Committer can also nominate a candidate for removal from the teams if the candidate has not shown any activity for 6 months at least or is not responsive.
- A candidate can also be nominated for removal from the teams if they break code of conduct or has consistently made contributions that are affecting the team.
- The voting process for removing a candiate is the same as the process for promoting a candidate (via PR).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Maintainers are required to vote, if a maintainer does not participate in five consecutive votes they could have maintainer status revoked
```

I don't know if I like my own words here but I think we should have a note akin to this in this document.

# Roles and Groups

This file contains an overview of our rules for roles and groups.

> ## [Definition of general roles](#roles)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Definition of general roles
```

The Hiero project (and the LFDT) defines 3 different types of **roles**: **Contributors**, **Committers**, and **Maintainers**.
Each person who contributes to Hiero must follow our [**Code of Conduct**](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/.github/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).
Those roles are not assigned globally for the Hiero project but per **project**.
In most cases a project is a single GitHub repository, but it can also be a group of repositories that are related to each other.
A person can have multiple roles in multiple projects.

> ### [Contributors](#contributors)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Contributors
```

Any person that does any contribution to the project is a Contributor. A contribution can be anything from opening an issue, to writing code, to writing documentation, etc.

>   - If a PR has gone 2 days without approvals or an Issue or Discussion has no activity for 2 days, the owner must reach our to our [hiero-general Discord channel](https://discord.lfdecentralizedtrust.org/).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - If a pull request has not received an approval within 2 days or a discussion has no activity for more than 2 days, the owner must reach out to the maintainers via our [hiero-general Discord channel](https://discord.lfdecentralizedtrust.org/).
```

>   - If a PR or discussion has gone stale for 2 weeks, the repo maintainers can close them due to inactivity.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - If a pull request or discussion has gone stale for more than 2 weeks, the repo maintainers may close them due to inactivity.
```

> 

Reviewer 5: Do we want to add any statements about issues here and the expectations?

Reviewer 6: I would think issues and discussions would have a longer grace period is it? PRs would take priority or sure.
There is no mention in our LFDT guidelines on how long issues and discussions can stay idle but this is something our community can established. @rbarker-dev , @hendrikebbers , do you have any suggestions?

Reviewer 6: I added some information on this in my latest patch

> We honor legitimate contributions to the project, and we want to make sure that all contributions are recognized.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion

We honor legitimate contributions to the project, and we want to make sure that all contributions are recognized.
```

A Contributor can be nominated by a Committer or a Maintainer to become a Committer:

  - **Start Contributing**: Submit pull requests, report bugs, improve docs, review code. Show consistency and quality in your contributions.

>   - **Build Trust and Tack Record**: Active committers will notice your contributions, your understanding, and responsiveness.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - **Build Trust and Track Record**: Active committers will notice your contributions, your understanding, and responsiveness.
```

  - **Build Trust and Track Record**: Active committers will notice your contributions, your understanding, and responsiveness.
  - **Get noticed**: Consistency and valuable contributions will create more project involvement and reliability.

>   - **Review eligibility**: A minimum number of approved PRs and a reasonable time contributing to the project (3-6 months) is the general acceptable baseline for eligibility.

Reviewer 6: Thank you!
Will include in my next patch

> ### [Committers](#committers)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Committers
```

### Committers

A Committer has specific rights for the project.

As an example a Committer can assign people to issues, merge PRs, or create branches directly in a repository of the project.

> Any Committer or Maintainer of the given project should nominate a Contributor to become a Committer based on the project's needs and following these steps:

Reviewer 6: Thank you! will add to my next patch

- **Evaluate your project's performance**: Committers and Maintainers should monitor their project health and velocity and make decisions about whether the project needs more Committers.
- **Verify your project's needs**: Committers or Maintainers should define the number of good contributions that a Contributor must reach to consider a nomination. This is based on the size and complexity of the repo in question.
- **Nominate more resources**: To promote a contributor, a vote should be held in a GitHub PR (by doing a change to the config.yaml file) and by making mention of the basis reached for nominating the Contributor.
- **Approve the nomination**: All Maintainers should vote on that nomination and the vote passes when reaching majority of votes.
- **Make adjustments**: Maintainers should be responsible for removing inactive committers. A committer is considered inactive if there has been no activity for six months and there has been no response when trying to contact them.
As long as a Committer follows our Code of Conduct, makes reasonable contributions to the project,

> and is not violating any of our policies, they will keep their Committer role.

Reviewer 6: Thank you!

> A committer can lose the role if:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Project maintainers may remove a committer if:
```

- Breaks Code of Conduct.

> - Shown no activity for 6 months and does not responds when reached.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Shown no activity for 6 months and does not respond when contacted by the project maintainers or LFDT staff.
```

- Shown no activity for 6 months and does not respond when contacted by the project maintainers or LFDT staff.

> - Keeps making bad decisions (their approvals and contributions are actively affecting the project's performance).

Reviewer 6: I agree, will include this in my next patch..

> The Maintainers of the project can decide to remove a Committer from the project based on those rules.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
```

> The addition or removal of committers must be decided by a project maintainer vote. The voting must be held via a GitHub PR (by doing a change to the `config.yaml` file).

Reviewer 6: Thank you! added to my next patch

> Like with the nomination of a Committer, the vote of the maintainers should be held in a GitHub PR (by doing a change to the `config.yaml` file).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The addition or removal of committers must be decided by a project maintainer vote. The voting must be held via a GitHub PR (by doing a change to the `config.yaml` file).
```

> ### [Maintainers](#maintainers)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Maintainers
```

The Maintainers of the project are the people that are responsible for the project.

A Maintainer should drive the project's roadmap/vision and take care of topics like community meetings,
the general structure of the project (fits our best practices, is secure, ...), and so on.

> In addition, the Maintainers should report project updates to the Hiero **Technical Steering Committee** (TSC).

Reviewer 5: Do maintainers present in the TSC meeting or how should updates be provided?

Reviewer 6: TSC meeting by adding it to the agenda, i can add that as additional information.

A Committer of a project can be nominated to become a Maintainer:

> - **Define your project's needs**: A repository should have 1 to 3 maintainers to ensure a project's sustainability and resilience. It is not necesarily a goal for the committer to become a mintainer unless the project's needs require it to have more maintainers.

Reviewer 5: typo mintainer -> maintainer

Reviewer 6: Thank you!

- **Nominate a maintainer**: To promote a candidate, a vote should be held in a GitHub PR (by doing a change to the config.yaml file) and by making mention of the basis reached for nominating the Maintainer.
- **Approve the nomination**: All Maintainers should vote on that nomination and the vote passes when reaching majority of votes.
- **Make adjustments**: A maintainer is considered inactive if there has been no activity for six months and there has been no response when trying to contact them.

> A maintainer can lose the role if:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Project maintainers or the TSC may remove a maintainer if:
```

- Breaks Code of Conduct.
- Are inactive for 6 months and does not respond when reached out to.
- Keeps making bad decisions (their contributions are actively affecting the project's performance).

More on maintainer guidelines can be found on the [**LFDT TAC site**](https://lf-decentralized-trust.github.io/governance/governing-documents/MAINTAINERS-file.html).

> ### [Voting](#voting)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Voting
```

When it comes to electing and voting for new committers or new maintainers, the project should consider the following:

For candidates working on getting promoted to Committers or Maintainers:
- The candidate needs to show participation in the project by contributing with code, issues, discussions, reviews, etc.
- These contributions need to show proper understanding of the project and quality of the work.
- 3 to 6 months worth of contributions is considered a good minimum for candidates to be selected for a role promotion.
- A Committer or Maintainer will be considered inactive if they shown no activity for 6 months at least, in such case, they could be selected for removal.
- A Committer can maintain their privileges independently from their job changes.

For Maintainers and Committers voting on new candidates:
- When a candidate is selected for becoming a Committer or a Maintainer, this proposal needs to be made via PR request against the config.yaml in the governance repo.

> - An example of a promotion can be found in the following [PR](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/governance/pull/208).

Reviewer 4: https://github.com/hiero-ledger/governance/pull/176 should be used as provides a clear timeline and means for a full quorum vote (including for, against, abstain, and not present/no vote cast).

```suggestion
- An example of a promotion can be found in the following [PR](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/governance/pull/176).
```

- Maintainers are required to vote, if a maintainer does not participate in five consecutive votes they could have maintainer status revoked.
- Once the PR has gathered the majority of the votes, the PR can be merged and the candidate will be officially part of their new Committer or Maintainer teams.
- If a PR remains inactive for 2 days, it is a responsibility of the PR owner to reach out to the reviewers via Discord, bring it up in Community calls or reach out for help in the [hiero-general Discord channel](https://discord.com/channels/905194001349627914/1289954446712770600).
- If a PR shows no activity for 2 weeks, it will be considered stale and it will be closed with no promotion.
- A Maintainer or Committer can also nominate a candidate for removal from the teams if the candidate has not shown any activity for 6 months at least or is not responsive.
- A candidate can also be nominated for removal from the teams if they break code of conduct or has consistently made contributions that are affecting the team.
- The voting process for removing a candiate is the same as the process for promoting a candidate (via PR).

> ## [Definition of groups](#groups)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Definition of groups
```

- **`hiero-automation`**: This group contains the CI/CD Automation service accounts for hiero-ledger projects.
- **`hiero-mirror-node-automation`**: This group contains the CI/CD Automation service accounts for hiero-ledger mirror node projects.
- **`github-maintainers`**: This group contains those responsible for maintaining our GitHub environment and infrastructure (including GitHub Action runners, ...).
- **`tsc`**: This group contains all members of the technical steering committee (TSC) as defined [here](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/tsc).
- **`lf-staff`**: This group contains all Linux Foundation and LF Decentralized Trust members that needs (mostly ADMIN) rights on the org.
- **`security-maintainers`**: This group contains members of the security teams who are responsible for monitoring and maintaining security within hiero-ledger projects.
- **`prod-security`**: This group contains members of the security teams who are responsible for monitoring and maintaining security within hiero-ledger projects.
- **`sec-ops`**: This group contains members of the security teams who are responsible for monitoring and maintaining security within hiero-ledger projects.

> ## [Definitions of rights](#rights)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Definitions of rights
```

# Roles and Groups

This file contains an overview of our rules for roles and groups.

## Definition of general roles

The Hiero project (and the LFDT) defines 3 different types of **roles**: **Contributors**, **Committers**, and **Maintainers**.
Each person who contributes to Hiero must follow our [**Code of Conduct**](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/.github/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).
Those roles are not assigned globally for the Hiero project but per **project**.
In most cases a project is a single GitHub repository, but it can also be a group of repositories that are related to each other.
A person can have multiple roles in multiple projects.

### Contributors

Any person who contributes to a project is a Contributor. A contribution can be anything from opening an issue, to writing code, to writing documentation, etc.

>   - If a pull request has not received an approval within 2 business days or a discussion has no activity for more than 2 business days, the owner must reach out to the maintainers via our [hiero-general Discord channel](https://discord.lfdecentralizedtrust.org/).

Author: The idea is to have a MAINTAINERS.md file in each repo that includes all Discord accounts of the maintainers. That is a definition that comes from LFDT. See https://lf-decentralized-trust.github.io/governance/governing-documents/MAINTAINERS-file.html

>   - If a pull request has not received an approval within 2 business days or a discussion has no activity for more than 2 business days, the owner must reach out to the maintainers via our [hiero-general Discord channel](https://discord.lfdecentralizedtrust.org/).

Author: > ... the owner must reach out to...
I would prefer "we suggest to reach out to..."

Reviewer 6: done

>   - If a pull request or discussion has gone stale for more than 2 weeks, the repo maintainers may close them due to inactivity.

Author: We should suggest that maintainers reach out to the creator before closing it. 2 weeks is a short period: a person can be on vacation for 2 weeks and not reacting based on that.

Reviewer: 2 weeks should be more than sufficient for a repository maintainer to see their notifications, in my opinion.

Reviewer 6: I agreee with the 2 weeks.. if a project is slower developing, they can suggest an exception in their repos

We honor legitimate contributions to the project, and we want to make sure that all contributions are recognized.

A Contributor can be nominated by a Committer or a Maintainer to become a Committer:

>   - **Start Contributing**: Submit pull requests, report bugs, improve documentation, review code. Show consistency and quality in your contributions.

Author: The list that starts here does not fit to the introduction.

Reviewer 6: I think is fitting, since these are pointers for new "Contributors" in specific. I think it makes sense to have them in the "Contributors" section. Otherwise, there is no section where these guidelines can go. 

This list is basically guidelines for Contributors in order to build history and get nominated by a Maintainer or Committer.

  - **Build Trust and Track Record**: Active committers will notice your contributions, your understanding, and responsiveness.
  - **Get noticed**: Consistent and valuable contributions will demonstrate more project involvement and reliability.

>   - **Review eligibility**: A minimum number of approved PRs and a reasonable time contributing to the project (often 3-6 months) is the general acceptable baseline for eligibility.

Reviewer 6: We can't put a number to this since some fast developing or more complex projects might require more contributions to be considered experienced. While other repositories, with less complexity, might require less contributions to understand the codebase. 
This is up to the tech team to evaluate the contributions (this is explained in further sections)
But what LF recommends is to have a 3 to 6 month experience in the code which is quite standard for open source projects.

>   - **Review eligibility**: A minimum number of approved PRs and a reasonable time contributing to the project (often 3-6 months) is the general acceptable baseline for eligibility.

Author: We should not write "A minimum number" if we do not define that number

Reviewer 6: Let me change that in my next patch

Reviewer 6: Is hard to put a number since each project might consider so many contributions enough (depending on the size of their projects) 

I will change the wording

### Committers

A Committer has specific rights for the project.

As an example, a Committer can assign people to issues, merge PRs, or create branches directly in a repository of the project.
Any Committer or Maintainer of the given project can nominate a Contributor to become a Committer based on the project's needs and following these steps:

> - **Define your project's needs**: A repository should have minimum 3 committers to ensure a project's sustainability and resilience. It will also allow for fairness in the votes. Project owners can choose to have more committers depending on the size of their project.

Author: > "have minimum 3 committers"

We have projects with less. So we can / should not define it like that if we do not have it today.

Reviewer 6: I reworded this to make it better

> - **Evaluate your project's performance**: Committers and Maintainers should monitor their project health and velocity and make decisions about whether the project needs more Committers.

Author: How should / can that be monitored

Reviewer 6: This can be done via GH Insights, LFX Insights, Bitergia and overall performance of their releases. I think Mentioning the tools here is a little bit too much information but metrics in general  is something that Diane and I are working on and eventually get into a 5 or 10 min segment in the TSC.

In general, is up to Maintainers to manage their projects and making sure they are performing and keeping up with the demand. 

They are also welcomed to use any other metrics tool, the ones I mentioned here are a suggestion.

- **Verify your project's needs**: Committers and Maintainers should define the number of good contributions that a Contributor must reach to consider a nomination. This is based on the size and complexity of the project in question.

> - **Nominate new committers**: To promote a contributor, a vote should be held in a GitHub PR (by proposing a change to the config.yaml file) and by describing the basis reached for nominating the Contributor. The template [vote_pr_template.md](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/governance/blob/main/.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE/vote_pr_template.md) should be used to creating a nomination.

Author: I hope not! A nomination is an easy task and does not require a vote.

> - **Nominate new committers**: To promote a contributor, a vote should be held in a GitHub PR (by proposing a change to the config.yaml file) and by describing the basis reached for nominating the Contributor. The template [vote_pr_template.md](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/governance/blob/main/.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE/vote_pr_template.md) should be used to creating a nomination.

Reviewer 6: Nominations are free for anyone, no need to vote no nominate someone. Only to approve the nomination.

> - **Nominate new committers**: To promote a contributor, a vote should be held in a GitHub PR (by proposing a change to the config.yaml file) and by describing the basis reached for nominating the Contributor. The template [vote_pr_template.md](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/governance/blob/main/.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE/vote_pr_template.md) should be used to creating a nomination.

Author: We should have 1 source for the full description of a voting process and not 2. Best would be to add the "Voting" section from the PR template in this doc

Reviewer 6: The reason why there are 2 is because we have one addressed to the Committers and one addressed to the Maintainers. Having them separate can offer more flexibility in the long run since the work of the committers and maintainers is different. 

In general, the doc is categorized by roles.

> - **Approve the nomination**: All Maintainers should vote on that nomination and the vote passes when a majority of maintainers vote to proceed. The voting procedure is explained in the same template [vote_pr_template.md](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/governance/blob/main/.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE/vote_pr_template.md).

Reviewer 6: The vote needs to reach quorum. If for some reason the maintainers are not responsive there are few things that can happen (described in the document):
- A maintained and a committer should be active in the community (otherwise, they wouldn't have gotten elected) 
- If the maintainer is not active or responsive for a long period of time they could be at risk of removing their privileges
- If a PR where a vote is requested is not active for 2 days, is up to the owner of the PR to reach out to people, this can be via meetings, discord, or other. 
- If a PR is stale for 2 weeks, the PR can be closed and the vote will become null

> - **Make adjustments**: Maintainers are responsible for removing inactive committers. A committer is considered inactive if there has been no activity for six months and there has been no response when trying to contact them.

Reviewer 6: yes,,, we mention the hiero-general Discord channel in this document. 
At the moment, that is the only official direct message option

As long as a Committer follows our Code of Conduct, makes reasonable contributions to the project,
and is not violating any of our policies, they will keep their Committer role.

Project maintainers may remove a committer if:

> - Breaks Code of Conduct.

Author: ```suggestion
- The Commiter breaks our Code of Conduct.
```
Same for all other points of the list

- Shown no activity for 6 months and does not respond when contacted by the project maintainers or LFDT staff.
- Keeps making bad decisions (their approvals and contributions are negatively affecting the project's performance).

The addition or removal of committers must be decided by a project maintainer vote. The voting must be held via a GitHub PR (by proposing a change to the `config.yaml` file).

### Maintainers

The Maintainers of the project are the people that are responsible for the project.

A Maintainer should drive the project's roadmap/vision and take care of topics like community meetings,
the general structure of the project (fits our best practices, is secure, ...), and so on.

> In addition, the Maintainers should report project updates to the Hiero **Technical Steering Committee** (TSC) meeting.

Author: ```suggestion
In addition, the Maintainers should report project updates to the Hiero **Technical Steering Committee** (TSC).
```
For sure reports should be open but it does not need to be in the meeting.

A Committer of a project can be nominated to become a Maintainer:

> - **Define your project's needs**: A repository should have 1 to 3 maintainers to ensure a project's sustainability and resilience. It is not necesarily a goal for the committer to become a maintainer unless the project's needs require it to have more maintainers.

Author: Again the phrase / introduction before the list does not fell well to the points of the list.

Reviewer 6: This relates to my comment I made in my previous note, this doc is organized in roles sections. In this case, we have one addressed to the Committers and one addressed to the Maintainers. Their guidelines are similar and might look repetitive but is important to keep them isolated to offer more flexibility.

Author: We can change it afterwards :) Not a blocker for this PR

> - **Nominate a maintainer**: To promote a candidate, a vote should be held in a GitHub PR (by proposing a change to the config.yaml file) and by making mention of the basis reached for nominating the Maintainer. The template [vote_pr_template.md](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/governance/blob/main/.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE/vote_pr_template.md) should be used to creating a nomination.

Reviewer 6: Maintainers and Committers can nominate Contributors to become Committers.
Maintainers can nominate Committers to become Maintainers. 
I would think that someone could nominate themselves and it has happened in other communities. Basically, anyone is free to push a PR request for a vote. The PR would need to have an explanation for the vote request and the voters will need to do a proper review of the nomination based on contribution history in order to approve or deny the nomination.

> - **Nominate a maintainer**: To promote a candidate, a vote should be held in a GitHub PR (by proposing a change to the config.yaml file) and by making mention of the basis reached for nominating the Maintainer. The template [vote_pr_template.md](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/governance/blob/main/.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE/vote_pr_template.md) should be used to creating a nomination.

Author: Since we now add all those explicit rules to the document we need to add that, too.

> - **Approve the nomination**: All maintainers should vote on that nomination and the vote passes when a majority of maintainers vote to proceed. The voting procedure is explained in the same template [vote_pr_template.md](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/governance/blob/main/.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE/vote_pr_template.md).

Reviewer 6: Generally, Maintainers should be responsive. In cases where someone goes on vacations or similar, we could expect votes to pass with majority of quorum. This is standard practice. However, once these guidelines are merged, teams can submit exceptions to the guidelines in cases where maybe they expect maintainers to be less active for whatever reason. This is why we need this doc posted, so that project Maintainers can submit their exceptions.

- **Make adjustments**: A maintainer is considered inactive if there has been no activity for six months and there has been no response when trying to contact them.

Maintainers are responsible for keeping track of project Issues and Discussions and help pushing inactive conversations. It is a responsibility of the maintainers to close Issues and Discussions that are considered outdated or stale to the current goals of the project.

> Project maintainers or the TSC may remove a maintainer who:

Author: Is that maintainer becoming a committer or a contributor?

Reviewer 6: Not sure I understand your question. 
"Project maintainers or the TSC may remove a maintainer who" refers to Maintainers or TSC members having the ability to remove another Maintainer in case that Maintainer is not performing as expected. 

In such case, Committers won't be able to suggest removal of Maintainers. 

In other cases, mentioned in this doc, both Maintainers and Committers can suggest a Committer removal.

Author: Will a removed maintainer become a committer or a contributor. That was my question

- Breaks Code of Conduct.
- Is inactive for 6 months and does not respond when contacted.
- Keeps making bad decisions (their contributions are negatively affecting the project's performance).

> 

Reviewer 7: What happens if a project loses all its maintainers?

More on maintainer guidelines can be found on the [**LFDT TAC site**](https://lf-decentralized-trust.github.io/governance/governing-documents/MAINTAINERS-file.html).

### Voting

When it comes to electing and voting for new committers or new maintainers, the project should consider the following:

For candidates seeking promotion to Committers or Maintainers:
- The candidate needs to show participation in the project by contributing with code, issues, discussions, reviews, etc.
- These contributions need to show proper understanding of the project and quality of the work.
- 3 to 6 months worth of contributions is considered a good minimum for candidates to be selected for a role promotion.
- A Committer or Maintainer will be considered inactive if they shown no activity for 6 months at least, in such case, they could be selected for removal.

> - A Committer can maintain their project status independently from their employment.

Reviewer 8: How will this work in cases where Github usernames are specifically tied to employment? I know a handful that have "work" usernames (e.g. \*points at self\* 😆)

Reviewer: The access to the repo and the permissions are associated with the github account that they were initially provided to. If we need to have a method to associate between verified people we can talk about that.

This should be talked about for a later update.

For Maintainers and Committers voting on new candidates:
- When a candidate is selected for becoming a Committer or a Maintainer, this proposal needs to be made via PR request against the config.yaml in the governance repo.

> - An example of a promotion can be found in the following [PR](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/governance/pull/176).

Author: That example is not following the template

Reviewer 6: This was suggested by Nathan, I think. Do we have a better example you can help me suggest?

- Once the PR is created, all the maintainers of the repo in question need to be added as reviewers and their vote should be provided.
- The creator of the PR should notify all maintainers that a vote is now open.
- Maintainers can vote in favor of the candidate's promotion by approving the PR with a comment indicating approval.

> - Maintainers can vote against the candidate's promotion by posting a comment in the PR along with their explanation.

Reviewer 8: Required to submit a 'Requests Changes' review, or merely a comment?

Reviewer: I think a comment. If we need to change it later we can. Also, individual projects can modify around this.

> - Maintainers can abstain from voting by posting a comment in the PR along with their explanation.

Reviewer 8: > Maintainers can abstain from voting

Minor note: we will want to clarify the verbiage here, and above; e.g. 'All Maintainers are required to participate in a nomination, but may effectively abstain from voting by only posting a comment in the PR.'

Reviewer 6: done

Reviewer 8: Thank you1

> - The comment associated with a maintainers vote should be formatted as `[APPROVE|REJECT|ABSTAIN] - <explanation>`.

Author: Is an explanation needed?

Reviewer: I think it would be best to provide some level of justification. Even a comment like `Approve - LGTM` would be a-okay in my book.

Reviewer 6: I agree.. people are free to expand on the explanation too... in my opinion a "LGTM" is a good example or maybe someone saying "This person is approved because they worked on several successful releases" is also just as good. 
This explanation section will offer flexibility in case people want to elaborate more in case of rejection.

> - Maintainers are required to vote, if a maintainer does not participate in five consecutive votes they will be considered "inactive" which can be grounds for removal of maintainer status.

Reviewer 8: Does this apply even if a 6-month period hasn't elapsed? In other words, if this situation does constitute legitimate grounds for removal, and it can take place within less than six months, we should consider adding this to the list of reasons to remove an individual earlier in the doc

Reviewer 6: This is standard practice. If a team decides to reduce or increase this time, they can submit an exception to this rule for their own projects.

> - Maintainers are required to vote, if a maintainer does not participate in five consecutive votes they will be considered "inactive" which can be grounds for removal of maintainer status.

Author: Why do we have such a rule?

Reviewer 6: Quite frankly, there has been a bunch of suggestions that I am not sure if I originally wrote it or if it was suggested. I think this is in order to prevent maintainers to become inactive. The expectation is that maintainers should be active and responsive. I can change the wording to make it more like this:

"if a maintainer does not participate in several consecutive votes they will be considered "inactive""

- Once the PR has gathered the majority of the votes, the PR can be merged and the candidate will be officially part of their new Committer or Maintainer teams.

> - If a PR remains inactive for 2 days, it is a responsibility of the PR owner to reach out to the reviewers via Discord, bring it up in Community calls or reach out for help in the [hiero-general Discord channel](https://discord.com/channels/905194001349627914/1289954446712770600).

Author: What happens if the owner does not follow that rule?

Reviewer 6: This document is a guideline... we cannot monitor what people are following but rather offer them a guideline to work on their projects and justify any role changes. I think what we are doing here is offering them best practices to help them define their project rules but is hard to enforce this. In general, that is what the Maintainers should be tasked with.

Reviewer: I agree with Hendriks suggestion. But also agree it could come in after there's a baseline.

> - Once the PR has gathered the majority of the votes, the PR can be merged and the candidate will be officially part of their new Committer or Maintainer teams.

Reviewer 9: I think this needs some clarification about what constitutes a majority when there are people who do not vote at all, and people who vote as `ABSTAIN`. I suggest:

```suggestion
- Once the PR has gathered the majority of the votes, the PR can be merged and the candidate will be officially part of their new Committer or Maintainer teams. A majority is defined as greater than 50% of this calculation: # of APPROVE votes / (# of maintainers - # of ABSTAIN votes)
```

Author: Can we add that once this PR is merged?

Reviewer: First, I agree this can wait until after the baseline merges...

But: do we need to have this calculation in there at all?

It's simpler in my mind to say "A majority is defined by the total votes either in favor or against. A vote to abstain will not impact the majority in either direction."

Reviewer 9: >Can we add that once this PR is merged?

Yes, absolutely.

>But: do we need to have this calculation in there at all?

I think we need something to explain how it works. I'm ok if it's not an equation, but I think it's simplest and clearest. How the abstention works is important if we are going to have a single group of maintainers.

Reviewer 9: >It's simpler in my mind to say "A majority is defined by the total votes either in favor or against. A vote to abstain will not impact the majority in either direction."

I think this is less clear because it indicates that in order to fail, a vote must have a majority REJECT votes, which is not true. A vote will fail if it does not get a majority APPROVE votes. Math is clearest :)

- If a PR shows no activity for 2 weeks, it will be considered stale and it will be closed with no promotion.

> - A Maintainer or Committer can also nominate a candidate for removal from the teams if the candidate has not shown any activity for 6 months at least or is not responsive.

Reviewer 8: Another instance of wording here that slightly conflicts with previous wording; I think I understand, really it's just a matter of consistency to help avoid confusion. E.g.:

> Project maintainers or the TSC may remove a maintainer

Whereas here, the doc only says that Maintainers/Committer 'can also nominate a candidate for removal...'

Or maybe I read it wrong–can Committers/Maintainers remove other Committers/Maintainers on legitimate grounds without a PR to change the config?

Reviewer 6: yes.. both committers and maintainers can make a nomination to remove an inactive candidate in an effort to "clean up" their project and evaluate if they need to promote someone else. I will fix this wording in my next post. In general i think the words "also" is causing issues, my apologies..

- A candidate can also be nominated for removal from the teams if they break code of conduct or has consistently made contributions that are affecting the team.
- The voting process for removing a candiate is the same as the process for promoting a candidate (via PR).

## Definition of groups

Since Hiero contains multiple projects, we define GitHub **groups** that are used to manage the access to the GitHub repositories.
The groups are defined in the `config.yaml` file and are used to manage the access to the GitHub repositories that belong to a project.
Contributors do not have any specific rights, and therefore we do not need to define any groups for them.
Committers and Maintainers are defined in groups that are used to manage the access to the GitHub repositories.
For each project we have defined a Committers group and a Maintainers group:

- **`PROJECT-maintainers`**: For each project we have a group that defines the Maintainers of that project.
- **`PROJECT-committers`**: For each project we have a group that defines the Committers of that project.

> There are general groups in the [`config.yaml`](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/governance/blob/main/config.yaml) file as well:

Reviewer 8: Are these groups _always_ defined or _optionally_ defined? E.g. `security-maintainers`, `prod-security`, and `sec-ops` seems like it could be overkill for some projects.

Author: Those are global and not per project

- **`security-maintainers`**: This group contains members of the security teams who are responsible for monitoring and maintaining security tooling and automated scanners within hiero-ledger projects.
- **`prod-security`**: This group contains members of the security teams who are responsible for reviewing code for security issues, threat modeling and reducing risk within hiero-ledger projects.
- **`sec-ops`**: This group contains members of the security teams who are responsible for responding to security incidents within hiero-ledger projects.

## Definitions of roles

For each project the following GitHub roles should be defined for the groups that work on the project.
The GitHub roles define the privileges afforded the groups on the GitHub repositories of the project.
All roles are based on the [GitHub role defintions](https://docs.github.com/en/organizations/managing-user-access-to-your-organizations-repositories/managing-repository-roles/repository-roles-for-an-organization).

- **`github-maintainers`**: `MAINTAIN`
- **`tsc`**: `MAINTAIN`
- **`PROJECT-maintainers`**: `MAINTAIN`
- **`PROJECT-committers`**: `WRITE`

> The GitHub roles are assigned in the [`config.yaml`](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/governance/blob/main/config.yaml).

Reviewer 8: Are changes to Github roles or groups also changed via the nomination process? (Obviously there needs to be a PR, but is voting required?)

Author: Good point. We should not define the full processes for voting but ignore how the process to add "security-maintainers" to a repo looks like. Who does that or vote for that?

# Roles and Groups

This file contains an overview of our rules for roles and groups.

## Definition of general roles

The Hiero project (and the LFDT) defines 3 different types of **roles**: **Contributors**, **Committers**, and **Maintainers**.
Each person who contributes to Hiero must follow our [**Code of Conduct**](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/.github/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).
Those roles are not assigned globally for the Hiero project but per **project**.
In most cases a project is a single GitHub repository, but it can also be a group of repositories that are related to each other.
A person can have multiple roles in multiple projects.

### Contributors

Any person who contributes to a project is a Contributor. A contribution can be anything from opening an issue, to writing code, to writing documentation, etc.

>   - If a pull request has not received an approval within 2 days or a discussion has no activity for more than 2 days, the owner must reach out to the maintainers via our [hiero-general Discord channel](https://discord.lfdecentralizedtrust.org/).

Reviewer 5: I think we should clarify business days

Reviewer 5: I am assuming that when we measure if we respond to community PRs in  2 BD we are excluding PRs from maintainers/committers. I recently worked on a script that will get all issues from community excluding maintainers/individuals involved in the project I can share.

Reviewer 6: Thank you!
I added that in my next patch..

>   - If a pull request has not received an approval within 2 days or a discussion has no activity for more than 2 days, the owner must reach out to the maintainers via our [hiero-general Discord channel](https://discord.lfdecentralizedtrust.org/).

Reviewer 10: It sounds like we should mandate all maintainers to have an active discord account, or change this rule

As an example a Committer can assign people to issues, merge PRs, or create branches directly in a repository of the project.
Any Committer or Maintainer of the given project should nominate a Contributor to become a Committer based on the project's needs and following these steps:

- **Define your project's needs**: A repository should have minimum 3 committers to ensure a project's sustainability and resilience. It will also allow for fairness in the votes. Project owners can choose to have more committers depending on the size of their project.
- **Evaluate your project's performance**: Committers and Maintainers should monitor their project health and velocity and make decisions about whether the project needs more Committers.
- **Verify your project's needs**: Committers or Maintainers should define the number of good contributions that a Contributor must reach to consider a nomination. This is based on the size and complexity of the repo in question.
- **Nominate more resources**: To promote a contributor, a vote should be held in a GitHub PR (by doing a change to the config.yaml file) and by making mention of the basis reached for nominating the Contributor.

> - **Approve the nomination**: All Maintainers should vote on that nomination and the vote passes when reaching majority of votes.

Reviewer 10: Should we specify how the voting works? is it 👍 👎 or approvals? can someone block a nomination PR? what happens in this case? I feel like these mechanisms should be more detailed

Reviewer 6: We are working on a template in governance where the vote takes place
https://github.com/hiero-ledger/governance/tree/main/.github/PULL_REQUEST_TEMPLATE

I can add more information regarding that now that we have the templates in place.. will commit that in my next patch..

As long as a Committer follows our Code of Conduct, makes reasonable contributions to the project,
and is not violating any of our policies, they will keep their Committer role.

Project maintainers may remove a committer if:

- Breaks Code of Conduct.
- Shown no activity for 6 months and does not respond when contacted by the project maintainers or LFDT staff.
- Keeps making bad decisions (their approvals and contributions are actively affecting the project's performance).

The addition or removal of committers must be decided by a project maintainer vote. The voting must be held via a GitHub PR (by doing a change to the `config.yaml` file).

### Maintainers

The Maintainers of the project are the people that are responsible for the project.

A Maintainer should drive the project's roadmap/vision and take care of topics like community meetings,
the general structure of the project (fits our best practices, is secure, ...), and so on.

In addition, the Maintainers should report project updates to the Hiero **Technical Steering Committee** (TSC) meeting.
A Committer of a project can be nominated to become a Maintainer:

> - **Define your project's needs**: A repository should have 1 to 3 maintainers to ensure a project's sustainability and resilience. It is not necesarily a goal for the committer to become a maintainer unless the project's needs require it to have more maintainers.
> - **Nominate a maintainer**: To promote a candidate, a vote should be held in a GitHub PR (by doing a change to the config.yaml file) and by making mention of the basis reached for nominating the Maintainer.
> - **Approve the nomination**: All Maintainers should vote on that nomination and the vote passes when reaching majority of votes.
> - **Make adjustments**: A maintainer is considered inactive if there has been no activity for six months and there has been no response when trying to contact them.

Reviewer 11: Editorial suggestions:
```suggestion
- **Define your project's needs**: A repository should have 1 to 3 maintainers to ensure a project's sustainability and resilience. It is not necesarily a goal for the committer to become a maintainer unless the project's needs require more maintainers.
- **Nominate a maintainer**: To promote a candidate, a vote should be held in a GitHub PR (by proposing a change to the config.yaml file) and by making mention of the basis for nominating the Maintainer.
- **Approve the nomination**: All maintainers should vote on that nomination and the vote passes when a majority of maintainers vote to proceed.
- **Make adjustments**: A maintainer is considered inactive if there has been no activity for six months and there has been no response when trying to contact them.
```

Reviewer 6: Thank you! Added

> Maintainers are responsible for keeping track of project Issues and Discussions and help pushing inactive conversations. Is a responsability of the maintainers to close Issues and Discussions that are considered outdated or stale to the current goals of the project.

Reviewer 11: Spelling error:
```suggestion
Maintainers are responsible for keeping track of project Issues and Discussions and help pushing inactive conversations. It is a responsibility of the maintainers to close Issues and Discussions that are considered outdated or stale to the current goals of the project.
```

Reviewer 6: Thank you! Added

> Project maintainers or the TSC may remove a maintainer if:
> 
> - Breaks Code of Conduct.
> - Are inactive for 6 months and does not respond when reached out to.
> - Keeps making bad decisions (their contributions are actively affecting the project's performance).

Reviewer 11: Wording, and active versus negative:
```suggestion
Project maintainers or the TSC may remove a maintainer who:

- Breaks Code of Conduct.
- Is inactive for 6 months and does not respond when contacted.
- Keeps making bad decisions (their contributions are negatively affecting the project's performance).
```

More on maintainer guidelines can be found on the [**LFDT TAC site**](https://lf-decentralized-trust.github.io/governance/governing-documents/MAINTAINERS-file.html).

### Voting

When it comes to electing and voting for new committers or new maintainers, the project should consider the following:

> For candidates working on getting promoted to Committers or Maintainers:
> - The candidate needs to show participation in the project by contributing with code, issues, discussions, reviews, etc.
> - These contributions need to show proper understanding of the project and quality of the work.
> - 3 to 6 months worth of contributions is considered a good minimum for candidates to be selected for a role promotion.
> - A Committer or Maintainer will be considered inactive if they shown no activity for 6 months at least, in such case, they could be selected for removal.
> - A Committer can maintain their privileges independently from their job changes.

Reviewer 11: More editorial suggestions:
```suggestion
For candidates seeking promotion to Committers or Maintainers:
- The candidate needs to show participation in the project by contributing with code, issues, discussions, reviews, etc.
- These contributions need to show proper understanding of the project and quality of the work.
- 3 to 6 months worth of contributions is considered a good minimum for candidates to be selected for a role promotion.
- A Committer or Maintainer will be considered inactive if they shown no activity for 6 months at least, in such case, they could be selected for removal.
- A Committer can maintain their project status independently from their employment.
```

Reviewer 6: Thank you! Added to my next patch

For Maintainers and Committers voting on new candidates:
- When a candidate is selected for becoming a Committer or a Maintainer, this proposal needs to be made via PR request against the config.yaml in the governance repo.
- An example of a promotion can be found in the following [PR](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/governance/pull/176).
- Once the PR is created, all the maintainers of the repo in question need to be added as reviewers and their vote should be provided.
- The creator of the PR should notify all maintainers that a vote is now open.
- Maintainers can vote in favor of the candidate's promotion by approving the PR with a comment indicating approval.

> - Maintainers can vote against the candidate's promotion by posting a comment in the PR along with their explanation.

Reviewer 11: Would it make sense to "request changes" as a negative vote?

- Maintainers can abstain from voting by posting a comment in the PR along with their explanation.
- The comment associated with a maintainers vote should be formatted as `[APPROVE|REJECT|ABSTAIN] - <explanation>`.

> - Maintainers are required to vote, if a maintainer does not participate in five consecutive votes they could have maintainer status revoked.

Reviewer 11: Mild suggestion, lack of activity should perhaps be considered "inactive", which _can_ be grounds for removal of maintainer status (as noted elsewhere):
```suggestion
- Maintainers are required to vote, if a maintainer does not participate in five consecutive votes they will be considered "inactive".
```

Reviewer 6: Thank you! I am gonna add the full phrase "will be considered "inactive" which can be grounds for removal of maintainer status" to add clarity of what could happen

Contributors do not have any specific rights, and therefore we do not need to define any groups for them.
Committers and Maintainers are defined in groups that are used to manage the access to the GitHub repositories.
For each project we have defined a Committers group and a Maintainers group:

- **`PROJECT-maintainers`**: For each project we have a group that defines the Maintainers of that project.
- **`PROJECT-committers`**: For each project we have a group that defines the Committers of that project.

There are general groups in the [`config.yaml`](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/governance/blob/main/config.yaml) file as well:

- **`hiero-automation`**: This group contains the CI/CD Automation service accounts for hiero-ledger projects.
- **`hiero-mirror-node-automation`**: This group contains the CI/CD Automation service accounts for hiero-ledger mirror node projects.
- **`github-maintainers`**: This group contains those responsible for maintaining our GitHub environment and infrastructure (including GitHub Action runners, ...).
- **`tsc`**: This group contains all members of the technical steering committee (TSC) as defined [here](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/tsc).

> - **`lf-staff`**: This group contains all Linux Foundation and LF Decentralized Trust members that needs (mostly ADMIN) rights on the org.

Reviewer 11: Editorial suggestion
```suggestion
- **`lf-staff`**: This group contains all Linux Foundation and LF Decentralized Trust members who require (mostly ADMIN) rights on the organization.
```

Reviewer 6: Thank you! Added

- **`security-maintainers`**: This group contains members of the security teams who are responsible for monitoring and maintaining security within hiero-ledger projects.
- **`prod-security`**: This group contains members of the security teams who are responsible for monitoring and maintaining security within hiero-ledger projects.

> - **`sec-ops`**: This group contains members of the security teams who are responsible for monitoring and maintaining security within hiero-ledger projects.

Reviewer 11: Perhaps explain how these three differ? The current explanations are identical.

Reviewer 6: Thank you!.. let me add a better description

Reviewer 6: Updated n my latest patch

> ## Definitions of rights

Reviewer 11: Would it make sense to describe this as `roles` rather than `rights`?
```suggestion
## Definitions of Roles
```

Reviewer 6: Good point... added

For each project the following GitHub roles should be defined for the groups that work on the project.

> The GitHub roles define the rights of the groups on the GitHub repositories of the project.

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
The GitHub roles define the privileges afforded the groups on the GitHub repositories of the project.
```

Reviewer 6: Thank you! Added

All roles are based on the [GitHub role defintions](https://docs.github.com/en/organizations/managing-user-access-to-your-organizations-repositories/managing-repository-roles/repository-roles-for-an-organization).

- **`github-maintainers`**: `MAINTAIN`
- **`tsc`**: `MAINTAIN`
- **`PROJECT-maintainers`**: `MAINTAIN`
- **`PROJECT-committers`**: `WRITE`

The GitHub roles are assigned in the [`config.yaml`](https://github.com/hiero-ledger/governance/blob/main/config.yaml).

## Usage of GitHub CODEOWNERS in combination with our roles, groups, and rights

A project can decide to use GitHub [`CODEOWNERS`](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/managing-your-repositorys-settings-and-features/customizing-your-repository/about-code-owners).
Using `CODEOWNERS` is a best practice.

> It should be encouraged in all projects but is not required.
> This helps maintainers ensure that the codebase is getting reviewed by the experts on those areas of the code.
> Combining the Contributors, Committers, and Maintainers roles with GitHub `CODEOWNERS` is a little bit tricky.
> So far, the following definitions are valid:
> 
> - The `CODEOWNERS` file defines some specific groups that are **codeowner** of particular files (or folders) of the repository.
> - A PR that contains changes on those files needs to be approved by one of those codeowners.
> - A `CODEOWNERS` file will not affect the definition of Contributors, Committers, and Maintainers.
> - The minimum permission a **codeowner** must have is `write` on a given repository. As such a **codeowner** must be a Committer or Maintainer on the project
>   (see [**`PROJECT-maintainers`**](#rights) and [**`PROJECT-committers`**](#rights) or one of our special groups like [**`lf-staff`**](#rights).

Reviewer 11: More editorial suggestions:
```suggestion
Use of `CODEOWNERS` should be encouraged in all projects but is not required.
This helps maintainers ensure that the codebase is reviewed by the experts in specific areas of the code.
Combining the Contributors, Committers, and Maintainers roles with GitHub `CODEOWNERS` may require extra care and consideration.
The following definitions help to describe the current effects:

- The `CODEOWNERS` file defines some specific groups that are **codeowner** of particular files (or folders) of the repository.
- A PR that contains changes on those files needs to be approved by one of those codeowners.
- A `CODEOWNERS` file will not affect the definition of Contributors, Committers, and Maintainers.
- The minimum permission a **codeowner** must have is `write` on a given repository. As such a **codeowner** must be a Committer or Maintainer on the project.
    - See [**`PROJECT-maintainers`**](#rights) and [**`PROJECT-committers`**](#rights) or one of our specific groups (for example, [**`lf-staff`**](#rights)) for added detail.
```

Reviewer 6: Thank you!
Added
